# ISS-EEPROMS
Cosmic rays are high energy particles in space composed mainly (around 90%) of protons (the nuclei of hydrogen), 9% alpha particles, and 1% heavier elements such as iron ions. They span a huge range of energies, measured by their mass and speed, and generally travel at the speed of light. In space, cosmic rays can cause memory errors, data corruptions, and faulty signals for chips. Cosmic rays often cause Single Event Upsets, more commonly referred to as bit flips (from a 0 to 1 or 1 to 0). Electrically Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory, or EEPROMs, is a type of non-volatile memory chip used in computers and other electronic devices to store critical data that remains intact even when power is off. A change in data from a bit flip could lead to significant data loss and major consequences.

Our experiment will test how different shielding methods such as Tungsten or UHMWPE reduce the frequency of bit flips in space. Tungsten and UHMWPE are effective due to their hydrogen-rich nature which causes elastic scattering. Tungsten, specifically, has a higher atomic number, making it an effective shield against photons in x-rays or gamma rays. UHMWPE, is a semi-crystalline polymer that is separate from regular, high-density polyethylene. The advantages of UHMWPE as compared to polyethylene include a higher molecular weight (at least 1 million g/mole), and a longer polymer chain which has much higher impact strength and wear resistance. Using 16 24LC256 EEPROM memory chips, 4 shielded with polyethylene and 4 shielded with UHMWPE, we will run XOR operations every 3 days to determine the quantity of bit flips. Afterwards we will compare the differences between the original data set and the altered one. We hypothesize that the EEPROM memory chips shielded with Polyethylene and UHMWPE will be better at resisting cosmic radiation data corruption than chips shielded with Tungsten because of the composition of material. 

We hypothesize that the EEPROM memory chips shielded with UHMWPE (Ulta-High Molecular Weight Polyethylene) and Tungsten will better resist cosmic radiation data corruption and result in fewer bit flips as compared to chips not shielded against cosmic rays because of the composition of the material. 

The purpose of our experiment is to investigate potential methods, specifically the use of tungsten and UHMWPE to limit data corruption and SEUs caused by cosmic rays to EEPROMS in microgravity. The results of this experiment would allow us to understand whether these shielding methods are effective in reducing the amount of bit flips caused by cosmic rays in EEPROMS. We can also use these same results to decide which approach is more appropriate for real spaceflight. The results of our experiment can be used to advance future research by providing a better understanding of cosmic rays on EEPROMS and how to integrate stronger shielding components to receive accurate data. The increasing amount of bit flips in these circuits caused by the ever-growing complexity and shrinking of size necessitates us to understand how we can shield chips, such as EEPROMS with proper shielding materials. This experiment will examine this issue in order for astronauts and researchers to receive accurately depicted data unaffected by cosmic rays in space.

https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1JTjg1ZogXGBQD-xvjujTasjQZLxee5Fu?usp=sharing
